## Renormalizability

[Taken from "The Standard Model - A Primer" by Cliff Burgess and Guy Moore.]

Physical quantum theories generally require an associated minimum distance or a maximum energy beyond which its applicability is nullified. An example is the quantum electrodynamics of electrons and photons. This theory is correct upto an energy of twice the mass of a muon: $$\Lamdba = 2m_\mu$$. At energy higher than this, muon pair-production can happen, leading to the presence of muons even if they are not present in the initial state. The correct theory for this higher energy regime becomes the quantum electrodynamics of electrons, photons and muons. In turn, this new theory will be only valid until the next energy cut-off which might be twice the mass of a pion, and so on.

This cut-off does not necessary show itself classically. However, in a quantum theory where all states can contribute to any given process as intermediate particles, the calculations will depend on the cut-off scale explicitly. If detail knowledge of the physics at the $$\Lamdba$$ scale and higher is needed in order to make theoretical predictions for processes at lower energy (where the theory is supposed to be valid), the theory is called non-renormalizable. Non-renormalizable theories have less predictive power since their predictions depend on physics at and higher than cut-off scale, which by construction is usually not accessible.

In renormalizable theories, the cut-off $$\Lambda$$ only appears in the physical predictions through a manageable number of parameters (like particles masses, charges, etc.) which are accessible via experiments. All processes can be calculated based on these parameters and definite predictions can be made then. Whether or not a theory is renormalizable when applied to a specific system depends on the properties of the system. A theory which is renormalizable must be, in a sense, completed upto the cut-off energy scale. Let us consider the theory describing the energy levels of the hydrogen atoms. Ignoring the structure of the nucleus or ignoring the contributions of orders $$E_\text{atom}/M_\text{proton}$$, this theory is given by the quantum electrodynamics of point-like particles electrons, protons and photons. It's renormalizable. Demanding accuracy higher than $$E_\text{atom}/M_\text{proton}$$, the structure of protons can no longer be ignored, leading to a non-renormalizable descriptions.

An example of non-renormalizable theory is as following. Assuming we want a theory to describe the nuclear-deuteron scattering data, in which we treat deuteron as a point particle. The theory in consideration is non-renormalizable. The energy scale $$E$$ of the physics we are studying (nuclear scattering) is the same as the cut-off scale $$\Lamdba$$ (bounding of neutron and proton inside the deuteron). Non-renormalizability of this theory means that the effects of the order $$E/\Lamdba$$ cannot be neglected.

It's important to look at this argument from a different perspective. We can use the renormalizability of a theory to tell what the new physics energy scale is. If we succeed in describing all data at currently accessible energy $$E$$, we know that the new physics scale will have to be much larger $$\Lambda \gg E$$. If a non-renormalizable theory is requied, we know that there are missing fundamental ingredients. In this sence, demanding renormalizability for the Standard Model implies that no hitherto unknown particles or interactions are required to address all present experiments. The sole exception for is the physics of neutrinos: neutrino masses in the Standard Model requires non-renormalizable interactions. The scale required to explain neutrinos masses is $$\Lamdba\sim10^{14}\,$$GeV, which is so much higher than the intrinsic scales in the electroweak theory. As a result, if the Standard Model is correct upto the electroweak scale, there are virtually no consequences of the high energy physics expected and we can treat the Standard Model as a renormalizable theory.
